---
layout: post
title: "Ethics"
subtitle: "Why we think and do the way we do."
date: 2021-02-14 09:07:23 -0600
background: 'https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1515463626042-123ab67dcaa7?ixid=MXwxMjA3fDB8MHxwaG90by1wYWdlfHx8fGVufDB8fHw%3D&ixlib=rb-1.2.1&auto=format&fit=crop&w=1500&q=80'
published: false
---

I took an ethics class as a high schooler (yes, my high school had an ethics class), and I remember liking the class a lot. We had to do this debate (I don't remember the topic) in the class using the concepts we learned. Whoever won could nominate a non-profit organization for which the instructor would make a donation. I didn't win, but the high-schooler-me had gotten overly excited and a bit aggressive, enough that the instructor had to quietly call me out on it. Another thing I remember vividly, is discussing the trolley problem. 
I don't really remember anything else. I guess the biggest takeaway for me at the time, was that there exists a study for 'right' and 'wrong'. Wikipedia provides a better 

Then I fell down the philosophy-ethics-rabbit-hole a couple of weeks ago (aka January 2021). Like most, I don't like being wrong, and hate situations when I can't logically explain my choices. So far, all the decisions I have made have been relatively easy ones- Between x, y, and z, which is better? 
Then, a friend introduced me to the field of BCIs (brain-computer interfaces), and the idea of being able to control things with your mind, even control your mind itself, got me pondering the harder decisions- Between x, y, and z, what is right? 

About a decade has passed since that ethics class, and I know a few more philosopical view out there, but not much more. I did order a book on bioethics, but since I don't have Amazon Prime, that's going to take a couple of weeks to get to my place.

So I consulted the trusty wikipedia, and here is what I found, and what I got out of it. Philosophy is incredibly complicated, so what I have here is like... an ELI5 of the views I found. 

### Philosophical idea 
* Absurdism: People want a purpose in life, but nobody actually has the ability to find that purpose. (Camus is a partypooper)
* Acosmism: Reality is an illusion.
* Agnosticism: We'll never know if the divine/ higher power/ God exists.
* Anarchism: Authority and hierarchy suck.
* Anatta (Buddism): 'I' do not exist.
* Anti-humanism: Human nature is ever changing. It has no definition.
* Antinatalism: Procreation is wrong (aka: being alive is pain, why would you bring another human into this world) (...somebody was not having a good day)
* Apatheism: I don't care if God exists or not. (Diderot: "It is very important not to mistake hemlock for parsley, but to believe or not believe in God is not important at all)
* Apathy: i dont care
* Cosmicism: There is no divine presence, and we humans are all insignificant.
* Cynicism: Reject material wealth and you shall be free.
* Dysteleology: We just sorta happened. We weren't created because somebody was bored, or wanted us to do grand things.
* Rational egoism: You're rational if you act on your own self-interest. 
* Eliminative materialism: 
* Existentialism: Only you decide your own life and your own existence.
* Hedonism: We are driven by the desire to increase pleasure and decrease pain. 
* Legal nihilism: Law doesn't just suck, it's destructive.
* Misanthropy: Humanity sucks.
* Misotheism: God sucks.
* Moral nihlism: There is no such thing as right or wrong.
* Nihilism: We're all gonna die anyways.
* Pessimism: Life sucks. Evil will prevail over Good.
* Postmodernism: We should not focus on binary narratives, nor pre-existing concepts (kind of like anti-humanism, except that it's not like the narrative changes. There is no narrative to change.)
* Structralism:  You need to know different elements of human culture 
* Radical skepticism: 
* Solipsism: I am real.
* Trivialism: Everything is true.

### Theories of Morality
* Moral Subjectivism: <em>You</em> decide what is right or wrong.
* Cultural Relativism: It depends on what the norm is at the time.
* Ethical Egoism: If it's for you, it is right. If it's not, then it is immoral.
* Divine Command Theory: Listen to God. (...the src does say this theory has serious flaws)
* Virtue Ethics: Whatever makes a good person is right.
* Feminist Ethics/ Masculine Ethics: Gender plays a role in discerning right from wrong.
* Utilitarianism: Overall utility deterined by the consequences of an action discerns right from wrong.
* Kantian Theory: Right and wrong is determined by the consequences.  (Also known as neo-consequentialist moral theory)
* Rights-based theories: If people have rights, then everybody must do their duty to uphold those rights.
* Contractarianism: Through social contract, right and wrong is decided. (Social contract = An implicit agreement between the individuals and the state/nation where the individual cooperates with society for social benefits)


I guess we could use philosophical ideas a framework through which we project ideas by supporting them with theories of morality. 

